\documentclass[0-thesis.tex]{subfiles}

\begin{document}
\gls{iot} is the notion of connecting physical objects to the
world-spanning Internet in order to facilitate services and communication both
machine-to-human and machine-to-machine. By having everything connected from everyday
appliances to vehicles to critical parts of infrastructure, computing will be ubiquitous
and the Internet of Things realized. The benefits from the IoT can range from quality of
life services, such as controlling lights and thermostats from afar, to data gathering
through wireless sensor networks, to enabling life critical operations such as monitoring
a pacemaker or traffic system. IoT is a broad definition and fits many different devices
in many different environments, what they all have in common is that they are physical and
connected devices.

The Internet of Things is expected to grow massively in the following years as devices get
cheaper and more capable. Ericsson expects the amount of IoT connections to reach 22.3
billion devices in 2024, of which the majority is short-range IoT devices
\parencite{ericsson-mobility-report}. However, cellular IoT connections are expected to
have the highest compound annual growth rate as 4G and new 5G networks enable even more
use cases for IoT devices.

In recent years the general public has become increasingly aware of digital attacks and
intrusions affecting their day to day lives. In 2016 the DNS provider Dyn was attacked by
a botnet consisting of heterogeneous IoT devices infected by the Mirai malware. Devices
such as printers and baby monitors were leveraged to launch an attack on Dyn's services
which affected sites like Airbnb, Amazon, and CNN \parencite{perlroth_2016}. Cardiac
devices implanted in patients were also discovered to be unsafe, with hackers being able
to deplete the batteries of pacemakers prematurely \parencite{hern_2017}. These cases and
many others make it clear that security in IoT is essential, and as IoT is expected to
grow rapidly insecure devices can cause even more problems in the future.

In addition to malware there are many other security concerns in IoT networks. These
issues include authentication, access control, multi-protocol networking, and updates
\parencite{jing2014, hossain2015, alrawais2017}. Many security issues are results of the
nature of IoT devices, for instance not being able to implement complex security
mechanisms on devices due to software or hardware constraints. This means security
solutions for IoT must be lightweight and designed specifically with IoT in mind and not
traditional networks.

Security in IoT is also closely related to its business potential. In a study by Bain \&
Company, the largest barrier for Internet of Things adaptation was security concerns, and
customers would buy an average of 70\% more IoT devices if they were secured
\parencite{ali_bosche_ford_2018}. Despite security being lacking today in IoT, the field
is expected to grow rapidly and an increase in unsecured devices could spell disaster.
Securing IoT equipment such as printers, baby monitors, and pacemakers is imperative to
prevent future attacks. But what about the devices currently employed without security, or
devices in which security vulnerabilities are discovered after deployment? They need to be
updated and patched in order to fix these vulnerabilities, but sending a technician to
each and every of the predicted 22.3 billion devices is not feasible. These devices would
need secure and remote updates which is a non-trivial task.

\section{Problem Statement}
\label{sec:problem-statement}
There is a need for secure software and firmware updates for IoT devices as
vulnerabilities must be patched. For many IoT devices this mean patches must be applied
over long distances and possibly unreliable communication channels as sending a technician
to each and every device is unfeasible. There are non-open, proprietary solutions
developed for specific devices but no open and interoperable standard. The \gls{ietf}
\gls{suit} working group aims to define an architecture for such a mechanism without
defining new transport, discovery, or security mechanisms \parencite{suit}. By expanding
upon the work of the SUIT group, a standardized update mechanism suitable for battery
powered, constrained, and remote IoT devices can be developed.

\subsection{Problem}
\label{ssec:problem}
The thesis aims to investigate the problem "How can the SUIT specification be applied to
develop a technology agnostic and interoperable update architecture for heterogeneous
networks of Internet of Things devices?". The thesis project will examine the architecture
and information model proposed by SUIT in order to create and evaluate an updating
mechanism for battery powered, constrained, and remote IoT devices with a life span
exceeding five years.

\subsection{Purpose}
\label{ssec:purpose}
The purpose of the thesis project is to provide an open and interoperable update mechanism
that complies with the standards suggested by the IETF SUIT working group. This will aid
other projects trying to secure their IoT devices following accepted standards.

\subsection{Goal}
\label{ssec:goal}
The goals of the thesis are to study current solutions and technologies and propose a
technology agnostic update architecture based on the SUIT architecture, as well as
proposing lightweight end-to-end protocols that instantiates the architecture, allowing
updates of IoT devices. The degree project shall deliver specifications and prototypes of
the protocols in an IoT testbed, as well as a thesis report.

\section{Methodologies}
\label{sec:methodologies}
The thesis will follow a mix of qualitative and quantitative methodologies. The SUIT group
defines some goals or constraints a suitable updating mechanism should follow, but as
their proposed architecture is agnostic of any particular technology these goals cannot be
easily quantified. It is more appropriate to regard them as qualitative properties the
mechanism should have. In addition there are some relevant measurements, such as memory
and power requirements of the updates, that can be used in an evaluation. The quantitative
part of the evaluation will follow an objective, experimental approach, while the
qualitative part will follow a interpretative approach.

\section{Risks, Ethics, and Sustainability}
\label{sec:risks-ethics-sustainability}
As IoT devices become more commonplace their security becomes more important. Incorrect or
faulty firmware or software can lead to incorrect sensor readings, a common application of
IoT devices, which in turn can lead to incorrect conclusions. This could have a large
effect on businesses such as agriculture and healthcare. Insecure communication channels
can expose confidential or personal data, something governments and international unions
are taking more seriously. 

As these devices might be connected on networks with other computers such as laptops, a
compromised IoT device can cause an attack to proliferate throughout an entire network.
This can affect other IoT devices as well as traditional computers, putting every
connected device at risk. Furthermore hacked devices can leak data to attackers and cause
service disruptions. All of these risks and more have to be accounted for as IoT is
expected to boom.

By providing updates for devices their life expectancy can increase. As IoT devices are
produced in the billions, increasing the lifespan of devices is important from a
sustainability perspective. If devices cannot be updated but instead have to be completely
replaced often it is a waste of resources. Updating devices is a crucial part in achieving
efficiency in how IoT devices are used.

\section{Scope}
\label{sec:scope}
The thesis will primarily focus on the use case of applying an entire update to one single
device consisting of only one microcontroller. The use case of applying differential
updates is considered important and the architecture will enable these kinds of updates,
but the prototype will only support it with respect to time.

\section{Related Work}
\label{sec:related-work}
\textbf{SWUpdate} is an update agent for embedded Linux systems that supports different
update strategies, payload formats, custom handlers, and other features
\parencite{swupdate}. It is released under the GPL-2.0 license and is suitable for open
source solutions. As mentioned however, it is only for more capable devices running Linux
systems and is thus not compatible with SUIT.

\textbf{Mender} is another software updater for embedded Linux devices released under the
Apache license \parencite{mender}. Mender includes a client as well as management server
and offers a paid, hosted solution in addition to their open source code base. As with
SWUpdate, Mender targets more capable devices than SUIT focuses on.

\textbf{MCUboot} is a secure bootloader for 32-bit microcontrollers released under the
Apache-2.0 license \parencite{MCUboot}. It aims to define a common bootloader
infrastructure as to enable secure software upgrades and is operating system and hardware
independent. It does not however deal with transport of updates at all as it is only a
bootloader.

\section{Outline}
\label{sec:outline}
Chapter 2 will provide the relevant background about the used protocols and operating
system as well as the SUIT specification. Following that, Chapter 3 presents the proposed
architecture of the thesis, a life cycle approach for IoT updates, examples of profiles
for implementing the architecture, and a description of a prototype implementation.
Chapter 4 shows the results from evaluating the proposed architecture in both a
qualitative and quantitative manner, and Chapter 5 ends the thesis with a discussion,
security considerations, and future work.

\end{document}