 \documentclass[0-thesis.tex]{subfiles}

\begin{document}
This chapter presents the theoretical background needed to understand the thesis.
Section~\ref{sec:network} introduces the network protocols used and motivates their use
over other protocols in an IoT context. The following section, Section~\ref{sec:suit}
presents and explains the SUIT architecture and information model and their respective
requirements as formulated by the IETF. Finally, Section~\ref{sec:contiki-ng} presents
the Contiki-NG operating system which the updating mechanism will be developed for as well
as the target hardware.

\section{IoT Network Stack}
\label{sec:network}
Network protocols in IoT networks operate under different circumstances compared to
traditional computer networks. Networks in IoT are defined by their low power
requirements, low reliability, and low computational performance on edge devices whereas
traditional networks enjoy high reliability, high throughput, and high computational
performance. This posts some constraints on the protocols used in IoT as they must
properly handle these characteristics.

One of the most widely used network protocol stacks today in traditional networks is based
on the \gls{ip}. The stack uses \gls{tcp} as a transportation protocol, usually with
\gls{tls} for security, and a common application layer protocol is \gls{http}. TCP is
however poorly suited for IoT networks as it is a connection based, stateful protocol
which tries to ensure the guaranteed delivery of packets in the correct order. There is
also advanced congestion control mechanisms in TCP which are hard to apply on unreliable
low-bandwidth networks. IoT networks often utilize \gls{udp} as a transport protocol instead.
UDP is also an IP-based protocol but is connectionless and less reliable than TCP,
performing on a best-effort level instead. Despite being less reliable, UDP often performs
better in IoT contexts.

As TLS is based on the same assumptions as TCP it is unsuitable for UDP networks. UDP
networks still need confidentiality and integrity through some means and thus use
\gls{dtls}, which is a version of TLS enhanced for use in datagram oriented protocols.
HTTP can be used over UDP for the application layer, but as HTTP is encoded in human
readable plaintext it is unnecessarily verbose and not optimal for constrained networks.
Instead, \gls{coap} is a common protocol for the application layer in IoT networks. Figure
\ref{fig:stack-comparison} shows the equivalent protocols for IoT network stacks versus
traditional network stacks. 

In this chapter, Section~\ref{ssec:udp} explains UDP and why it is the preferred
transport protocol in IoT networks. Section~\ref{ssec:dtls} briefly explains TLS, why
it is unsuitable for IoT networks, the differences between TLS and DTLS and why DTLS is
used instead. Section~\ref{ssec:coap} describes the CoAP protocol, and lastly
Section~\ref{ssec:est-coaps} briefly introduces EST-coaps, the certificate enrollment
protocol used in the thesis.

\begin{figure}
    \begin{bytefield}[bitformatting=\small, bitwidth=1.1em]{30}
        \bitbox[]{12}{IoT stack} & \bitbox[]{4}{} & \bitbox[]{12}{Traditional stack}\\
        \bitbox{12}{CoAP(s)} & \bitbox[]{4}{$\Longleftrightarrow$} \bitbox{12}{HTTP(S)}\\
        \bitbox{6}{UDP} & \bitbox{6}{DTLS} & \bitbox[]{4}{$\Longleftrightarrow$} \bitbox{6}{TCP} & \bitbox{6}{TLS}\\
        \bitbox{12}{IPv6} & \bitbox[]{4}{$\Longleftrightarrow$} \bitbox{12}{IPv4 or IPv6}\\
        \bitbox{6}{IEEE 802.15.4} & \bitbox{6}{6LoWPAN} & \bitbox[]{4}{$\Longleftrightarrow$} \bitbox{12}{IEEE 802.15.4}\\
        \bitbox{12}{IEEE 802.15.4} & \bitbox[]{4}{$\Longleftrightarrow$} \bitbox{12}{IEEE 802.15.4}\\
    \end{bytefield}
    \caption{Comparison of network stacks between IoT networks and traditional networks.}
    \label{fig:stack-comparison}
\end{figure}

\subsection{UDP}
\label{ssec:udp}
UDP is a stateless and asynchronous transfer protocol for IP \parencite{rfc768}. It does
not provide any reliability mechanisms but is instead a best-effort protocol. It also does
not guarantee delivery of messages. For general purposes in unconstrained environments TCP
is usually the favored transport protocol as it is robust and reliable, but in
environments where resources are scarce and networks unreliable, a stateful protocol like
TCP could face issues. Since TCP wants to ensure packet delivery, it will retransmit
packages generating a lot of traffic and processing required for a receiver. Also, if the
connection is too unstable TCP will not work at all since it can no longer guarantee the
packets arrival. The best-effort approach of UDP is favorable in these situations, in
addition to UDP being a lightweight protocol requiring a smaller memory footprint to
implement.

Figure~\ref{fig:udp-header} shows the UDP header format. The source port is optional, the
length denotes the length of the datagram (including the header), and the checksum is
calculated on a pseudo-header constructed from both the IP header, UDP header, and data.
UDP headers are minimalist which shows the point of it being a lightweight protocol with
not many features available.

\begin{figure}
    \begin{bytefield}[bitformatting=\small, bitwidth=1.1em]{32}        
        \bitheader{0-31}\\
        \bitbox{16}{Source port} & \bitbox{16}{Destination port}\\
        \bitbox{16}{Length} & \bitbox{16}{Checksum}\\
        \bitbox[tlb]{32}{Data octets $\dots$}\\
    \end{bytefield}
    \caption{The UDP header format.}
    \label{fig:udp-header}
\end{figure}

\subsection{DTLS}
\label{ssec:dtls}
DTLS is a protocol which adds confidentiality and integrity to datagram protocols like UDP
\parencite{rfc6347}. The protocol is designed to prevent eavesdropping, tampering, or
message forgery. DTLS is based on TLS, a similar protocol for stateful transport protocols
such as TCP, which would not work well on unreliable networks as previously discussed. The
main issues with using TLS over unreliable networks is that TLS decryption is dependant on
previous packets, meaning the decryption of a packet would fail if the previous packet was
not received. In addition, the TLS handshake procedure assumes all handshake messages are
delivered reliably which is rarely the case in IoT networks.

DTLS solves this by banning stream ciphers, effectively making decryption an independent
operation between packets, as well as adding explicit sequence numbers. Furthermore, DTLS
supports packet retransmission, reordering, as well as fragmenting DTLS handshake messages
into several DTLS records. These mechanisms makes the handshake process feasible over
unreliable networks. 

By splitting messages into different DTLS records, fragmentation at the IP level can be
avoided since a DTLS record is guaranteed to fit an IP datagram. IP fragmentation is
problematic in low-performing networks since if a single fragment of an IP packet is
dropped all fragments of that packet must be retransmitted, and thus fragmenting at the IP
level should be avoided. Since DTLS is designed to correctly handle reordering and
retransmission in lossy networks, splitting messages into several DTLS records is no
problem, and if one record is lost only that record needs to be retransmitted in a single
IP packet.

Listing~\ref{lst:dtls-plain} shows the DTLS record structure. It contains a TLS 1.2 type
field, a version field which for DTLS 1.2 is 254.253, an epoch counter that is incremented
for each cipher state change, an increasing sequence number (unique to each epoch), a
length field and a fragment field containing the application data \parencite{rfc5246}.
These fields, with the exception of the epoch and sequence number, are the same 
as in TLS 1.2 \parencite{rfc6347}.

\begin{lstlisting}[language=blockc,
                    caption={The DTLS plaintext record structure.}, 
                    label={lst:dtls-plain}]
    struct {
        ContentType type;
        ProtocolVersion version;
        uint16 epoch;
        uint48 sequence_number;
        uint16 length;
        opaque fragment[DTLSPlaintext.length];
    } DTLSPlaintext;
\end{lstlisting}

\begin{lstlisting}[language=blockc,
                    caption={The DTLS ciphertext record structure.}, 
                    label={lst:dtls-cipher}]
    struct {
        ContentType type;
        ProtocolVersion version;
        uint16 epoch;
        uint48 sequence_number;
        uint16 length;
        select (CipherSpec.cipher_type) {
            case block: GenericBlockCipher;
            case aead: GenericAEADCipher;
        } fragment;
    } DTLSCiphertext;
\end{lstlisting}

TLS records are compressed and then encrypted, the same holds for DTLS. When initiating
contact, a compression algorithm is chosen. The DTLSPlaintext is then compressed into a
DTLSCompressed record, with similar structure to Listing~\ref{lst:dtls-plain}. The
compressed record is encrypted into a DTLSCiphertext record whose structure is shown in
Listing~\ref{lst:dtls-cipher}. Note that since DTLS disallows stream ciphers they are not
an option in the encrypted fragment, whereas in TLS they are.

In order to communicate via TLS and DTLS, a handshake has to be carried out. The handshake
establishes parameters such as protocol version, cryptographic algorithms, and shared
secrets. The TLS handshake involves hello messages for establishing algorithms, exchanging
random values, and checking for earlier sessions. Then cryptographic parameters are shared
in order to agree on a shared premaster secret. The parties authenticate each other via
public key encryption, generate a shared master secret based on the premaster secret, and
finally verifies that their peer has the correct security parameters. The DTLS handshake
adds to this a stateless cookie exchange to prevent DoS attacks, some modifications to the
handshake header to make communication over UDP possible, and retransmission timers since
the communication is unreliable. Otherwise the DTLS handshake is as the TLS handshake.
Since the (D)TLS handshake assumes asymmetric cryptography, and the SUIT standard does as
well as explained in Section~\ref{ssec:architecture}, devices must be able to enroll for
certificates. EST-coaps is an enrollment protocol designed for use over CoAPs, and is
introduced in Section~\ref{ssec:est-coaps}.

\subsection{CoAP}
\label{ssec:coap}
CoAP is an application layer protocol designed to be used by constrained devices over
networks with low throughput and possibly high unreliability for machine-to-machine
communication \parencite{rfc7252}. While designed for constrained networks, a design
feature of CoAP is how it is easily interfaced with HTTP so that communication over
traditional networks can be proxied. CoAP uses a request/response model similar to HTTP
with method codes and request methods that are easily mapped to those of HTTP. Furthermore
CoAP is a RESTful protocol utilizing concepts such as endpoints, resources, and \gls{uri}.
These features makes it easier to design IoT applications that seamlessly interact with
traditional web services. Additionally CoAP offers features such as multicast support,
asynchronous messages, low header overhead, and UDP and DTLS bindings which are all
suitable for constrained environments.

As CoAP is usually implemented on top of UDP, communication is stateless and asynchronous.
For this reason CoAP defines four message types: Confirmable, Non-confirmable,
Acknowledgment, and Reset. Confirmable messages must be answered with a corresponding
Acknowledgment, this provides one form of reliability over an otherwise unreliable
channel. Non-confirmable messages do not require an Acknowledgment and thus act
asynchronously. Reset messages are used when a recipient is unable to process a
Non-confirmable message. Confirmable, Non-confirmable, and Acknowledgment messages all use
Message IDs in order to detect duplicate messages in case of retransmission.

Since CoAP is based on unreliable means of transport, there are some lightweight
reliability and congestion control mechanics in CoAP. Message IDs allows for detection of
duplicate messages and tokens allow asynchronous requests and responses be paired
correctly. There is also a retransmission mechanic with an exponential back-off timer for
Confirmable messages so that lost Acknowledgments does not cause a flood of
retransmissions. Additionally, CoAP features piggybacked responses, meaning a response can
be sent in the Acknowledgment of a Confirmable or Non-Confirmable request if the response
fits and is available right away. This also reduces the amount of messages sent by the
protocol.

Figure~\ref{fig:coap} shows the CoAP message format. The header contains fields for
version, type, token length, code, and message ID. Following these fields are the actual
token, options, and optional payload. The length of the payload is dependant on the
carrying protocol, which in this thesis will be DTLS. The length of the payload is
calculated depending on the size of the CoAP header, token, and options as well as maximum
DTLS record size. Section 4.6 of the CoAP standard says "If the Path MTU [Maximum
Transmission Unit] is not known for a destination, an IP MTU of 1280 bytes SHOULD be
assumed; if nothing is known about the size of the headers, good upper bounds are 1152
bytes for the message size and 1024 bytes for the payload size" \parencite{rfc7252}.

\begin{figure}
    \begin{bytefield}[bitformatting={\small}, bitwidth=1.1em]{32}
        \bitheader{0-31}\\
        \bitbox{2}{Ver} & \bitbox{2}{T} & \bitbox{4}{TKL} & \bitbox{8}{Code}
        & \bitbox{16}{Message ID}\\
        \bitbox[ltb]{32}{Token (if any, TKL bytes) $\dots$}\\
        \bitbox[ltb]{32}{Options (if any) $\dots$}\\
        \bitbox{8}{1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1} & \bitbox[ltb]{24}{Payload (if any) $\dots$}
    \end{bytefield}
    \caption{The CoAP message format.}
    \label{fig:coap}
\end{figure}

Since firmware images can be relatively large their size needs to be handled during
transportation, which can be done via block-wise transfers \parencite{rfc7959}. A Block
option allows stateless transfer of a large file separated in different blocks. Each block
can be individually retransmitted and by using monotonically increasing block numbers, the
blocks can be reassembled. The size of blocks can also be negotiated between server and
client meaning they can always find a suitable block size, making the mechanism quite
flexible. Another option of interest is the observe option, which allows a client to be
notified by the server when a particular resource changes. This option can be used in a
pull or hybrid update architecture, meaning the device does not have to continuously poll
the server for a new manifest.

\subsection{EST-coaps}
\label{ssec:est-coaps}
EST-coaps is a protocol for certificate enrollment in constrained environments using CoAP.
\parencite{est-coaps}. By allowing IoT devices to enroll for certificates, asymmetric
encryption can be used even in a constrained environment. EST-coaps is heavily based on
\gls{est} which was developed for traditional, less constrained networks and is thus
incompatible with the SUIT standard, which is specified to work on very small devices
\parencite{rfc7030}. EST-coaps retains much of the functionality and structure of EST but
modifies it slightly to work over CoAP, DTLS, and UDP instead of HTTP, TLS, and TCP, for
instance by making use of CoAPs block requests and responses to remedy the relatively
large sizes of certificates.

\section{SUIT}
\label{sec:suit}
The IETF SUIT (Software Updates for Internet of Things) working group aims to define a
firmware update solution for IoT devices that is interoperable and non-proprietary
\parencite{suit}. The working group does not however try to define new transport or
discovery mechanism, making their proposal agnostic of any particular technology. The
solution shall be usable on Class 1 devices, defined by ~10 KiB RAM and ~100 KiB code size
\parencite{rfc7228}. The solution may be applied to more powerful devices, such as the one
used in this thesis described in Section~\ref{ssec:firefly}.

Section~\ref{ssec:architecture} presents the SUIT architecture and
Section~\ref{ssec:information-model} presents the SUIT information model.

\subsection{Architecture}
\label{ssec:architecture}
There is an Internet Draft by the SUIT group focusing on the architecture of the firmware
update mechanism \parencite{suit-architecture}. This draft describes the goals and
requirements of the architecture, although makes no mention of any particular technology.
The overarching goals of the update process is to thwart any attempts to flash
unauthorized, possibly malicious firmware images as well as protecting the firmware
image's confidentiality and integrity. These goals reduces the possibility of an attacker
either getting control over a device or reverse engineering a malicious but valid firmware
image as an attempt to mount an attack.

In order to accept an image and update itself, a device must make several decisions about
the validity and suitability of the image. The information needed comes in form of a
manifest. The next section will describe the requirements posted upon this manifest in
more detail. The manifest helps the device make important decisions such as if it trusts
the author of the new image, if the image is intact, if the image is applicable, where the
image should be stored and so on. This in turns means the device also has to trust the
manifest itself, and that both manifest and update image must be distributed in a safe and
trusted architecture. The draft \parencite{suit-architecture} presents ten qualitative
requirements this architecture should have:

% TODO: Descriptive list instead?
\begin{itemize}
    \item Agnostic to how firmware images are distributed:\\
            The mechanism should not assume a particular technology is used to distributed
            manifests and images, but instead be able to be carried over different
            mediums. This means decisions about formats and distribution methods must not
            rely on features of a particular technology. This thesis will as discussed use
            a CoAP/UDP stack, but the developed prototype will not be specific to this
            stack.
    \item Friendly to broadcast delivery:\\
            The mechanism should be broadcast friendly, meaning the mechanism can not be
            reliant on security on the transport layer or below. Also, devices receiving
            broadcast updates not meant for them should not incorrectly apply the update.
    \item Use state-of-the-art security mechanisms:\\
            The SUIT standard assumes a \gls{pki} is in place. As
            previously mentioned, EST-coaps will be used for device enrollment. The PKI
            will allow for signing of the update manifest and firmware image.
    \item Rollback attacks must be prevented:\\
            The manifest will contain metadata such as monotonically increasing sequence
            numbers and best-before timestamps to avoid rollback attacks.
    \item High reliability:\\
            This is an implementation requirement and depends heavily on the hardware of
            the target device. % TODO: Mention possibilities specifically for Firefly? Or
            % refer to some later chapter?
    \item Operate with a small bootloader:\\
            This is also an implementation requirement. % TODO: Same as above?
    \item Small parser:\\
            It must be easy to parse the fields of the update manifest as large parser can
            get quite complex. Validation of the manifest will happen on the constrained
            devices which further motivates a small parser and thus less complex
            manifests.
    \item Minimal impact on existing firmware formats:\\
            The update mechanism itself must not make assumptions of the current format of
            firmware images, but be able to support different types of firmware image
            formats.
    \item Robust permissions:\\
            This requirement is directed towards the administration of firmware updates
            and how different roles interact with the devices. The thesis will not
            consider any infrastructure outside of transporting manifest and image and
            applying the update, such as device management, but will consider
            authorisation of parties through techniques like signing.
    \item Operating modes:\\
            The draft presents three broad modes of updates: client-initiated updates,
            server-initiated updates, and hybrid updates, where hybrids are mechanisms
            that require interaction between the device and firmware provider before
            updating. The thesis will look into all three of these broad classes. Some
            classes may be preferred over others based on the technologies chosen in the
            thesis.
\end{itemize}

The distribution of manifest and firmware image is also discussed, with a couple of
options being possible. The two approaches are shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:manifest-image-combined-distribution} and
Figure~\ref{fig:manifest-image-separate-distribution}. The first figure shows the manifest
and image distributed together to a firmware server. The device then receives the manifest
either via pulling or pushing and can subsequently download the image from the same
server. Alternatively, as shown in the second figure, the manifest itself can be directly
sent to the device without a need of a firmware server, while the firmware image is put on
the firmware server. After the device has received the lone manifest through some method,
the firmware can be downloaded from the firmware server. The SUIT architecture does not
enforce a specific method to be used when delivering the manifest and firmware, but states
that an update mechanism must support both types.

\begin{figure}
    \caption{Distributing both manifest and image through a firmware server.}   
    \label{fig:manifest-image-combined-distribution}
    \begin{tikzpicture}[>=stealth',
        box/.style={rectangle,draw,minimum width=3cm,minimum height=2cm},
        line/.style={->,shorten >=3mm, shorten <=3mm}]
        
        \node[box] (author) {Firmware author};
        \node[box, right=5cm of author] (device) {Device};
        \node[box, above right=2.5cm and 2.5cm of author, anchor=center] (server) {Firmware server};
        
        \draw[line] (author.north) -- node[above,sloped] 
            {Manifest} node[below,sloped]{Image} (server.west); 
        
        \draw[line] (server.east) -- node[above,sloped] 
            {Manifest} node[below,sloped]{Image} (device.north); 
    \end{tikzpicture}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
    \caption{Distributing the manifest directly to the device and image through a firmware server.}
    \label{fig:manifest-image-separate-distribution}
    \begin{tikzpicture}[>=stealth',
        box/.style={rectangle,draw,minimum width=3cm,minimum height=2cm},
        line/.style={->,shorten >=3mm, shorten <=3mm}]
        
        \node[box] (author) {Firmware author};
        \node[box, right=5cm of author] (device) {Device};
        \node[box, above right=2.5cm and 2.5cm of author, anchor=center] (server) {Firmware server};
        
        \draw[line] (author.north) -- node[above,sloped] 
            {Image} (server.west); 

        \draw[line] (author.east) -- node[above, sloped]
            {Manifest} (device.west);
        
        \draw[line] (server.east) -- node[above,sloped] 
            {Image} (device.north); 
    \end{tikzpicture}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Information Model}
\label{ssec:information-model}
The Internet Draft for the SUIT information model presents the information needed in the
manifest to secure a firmware update mechanism \parencite{suit-information-model}. A
manifest is needed for a device to make a decision about whether or not to update itself,
and if the image related to the manifest is valid and its integrity ensured.

The draft also presents threats, classifies them according to the STRIDE model, and
presents security requirements that map to the threats \parencite{stride}. Finally it
presents use cases and maps usability requirements to the use cases in order to motivate
the presence of the manifest elements. Since the thesis makes a choice about specific
technologies to use, not all use cases, usability requirements, and manifest elements are
deemed necessary. The threats and security requirements however are. Note that the
information model does not discuss threats outside of transporting the updates, such as
physical attacks.

The proposed manifest elements and their brief motivations can be seen in
Table~\ref{tab:manifest-elements}. For more detailed motivations, use cases, and
requirements refer to \parencite{suit-information-model}.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lll@{}}
    \caption{The proposed manifest elements of the SUIT information model. Adapted from \parencite{suit-information-model}.}
    \label{tab:manifest-elements}\\
    \toprule
    \begin{minipage}[b]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Manifest Element\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Status\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Motivation/Notes\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \midrule
    \endhead
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Version identifier\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Describes the iteration of the manifest format\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Monotonic Sequence Number\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Prevents rollbacks to older images\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Payload Format\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Describes the format of the payload\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Storage Location\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Tells the device which component is being updated, can be used to
    establish physical location of update\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Payload Digest\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    The digest of the payload to ensure authenticity. Must be possible to
    specify more than one payload digest indexed by XIP Address\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    XIP Address\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    -\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Used to specify which address the payload is for in systems with several
    potential images\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Size\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    The size of the payload in bytes\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Signature\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    The manifest is to be wrapped in an authentication container (not a
    manifest element itself)\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Dependencies\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    A list of digest/URI pairs linking manifests that are needed to form a
    complete update\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Precursor Image Digest Condition\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory (for differential updates)\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    If a precursor image is required, the digest condition of that image is needed\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Content Key Distribution Method\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Mandatory (for encrypted payloads)\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Tells how keys for encryption/decryption are distributed\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Vendor ID Condition\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Recommended\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Helps distinguish products from different vendors\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Class ID Condition\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Recommended\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Helps distinguish incompatible devices in a vendors infrastructure\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    \strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    \strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    \strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Required Image Version List\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Optional\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    A list of versions that must be present to apply an update which applies
    to multiple versions of a firmware\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Best-Before Timestamp Condition\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Optional\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Tells the last application time\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Component Identifier\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Optional\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    For heterogeneous storage architecture, identifies which part is to store the
    payload\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    URIs\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Optional\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    A list of weighted URIs used to obtain the payload\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Directives\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Optional\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    A list of instructions on processing the manifest. Applies to the entire
    manifest, unlike ``Processing Steps''\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Aliases\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Optional\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    A list of digest/URI pairs\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \begin{minipage}[t]{0.23\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    Processing Steps\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.26\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    -\strut
    \end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.60\columnwidth}\raggedright\strut
    A list of payload processors needed to process a nested format\strut
    \end{minipage}\tabularnewline
    \bottomrule
\end{longtable}

% TODO: Which manifest elements are deemed most useful/needed? Is this a question for the
% design part of the thesis?

Certain elements of the manifest are dependant on certain use cases. Examples of this are
storage location (assumes there are more than one components on the device) and precursor
image digest condition (assumes differential updates). Since the thesis is primarily
exploring singular updates for a specific, homogeneous device type, not all elements would
be mandatory for the particular use cases of the thesis. This will have to be taken into
consideration when designing the manifest transport protocol as the manifest should not be
too specific to the use cases of the thesis, but rather be prepared for a variety of use
cases.

To summarize, the SUIT information model proposes to use a signed manifest that is
distributed to each device in need of an update through some method. The device then
parses the manifest in order to determine if the update is trusted, suitable, and up to
date, with many other optional elements such as if special processing steps or new URIs to
fetch the images are needed. The model does not make assumptions about technology which is
one of the reasons there are optional elements, not all of them are applicable to all
solutions. Nevertheless, the architecture and information model together provides a solid
base on which to design a secure update mechanism for IoT.

\section{Contiki-NG}
\label{sec:contiki-ng}
% TODO: For details on image flipping/bootloaders, talk to Niclas
Contiki-NG is an open-source operating system for resource constrained IoT devices based
on the Contiki operating system \parencite{contiki-ng-github, contiki-github}.
Contiki-NG focuses on low-power communication and standard protocols and comes with
IPv6/6LoWPAN, DTLS, and CoAP implementations which makes it a suitable operating system for
this thesis. Furthermore Contiki-NG is open source and licensed under the permissive BSD
3-Clause license and targets a wide variety of boards which makes it align with SUITs goal
of creating an open standard for updating IoT devices.

Section~\ref{ssec:process-event} explains processes and events, and
Section~\ref{ssec:memory} explains memory management in Contiki-NG. These internals are
heavily based on the previous Contiki operating system and much of the information is
gathered from there. Section~\ref{ssec:timers} presents the different timers available in
Contiki-NG. Section~\ref{ssec:networking-contiki} presents part of the network protocol
stack that is implemented in standard Contiki-NG. Finally, Section~\ref{ssec:firefly}
presents the target hardware Contiki-NG will run on.

\subsection{Processes and Events}
\label{ssec:process-event}
Contiki-NG has a process abstraction which is built on lightweight protothreads
\parencite{protothreads}. Protothreads can be seen as a combination of threads and
event-driven programming. Threads or multi-programming provides a way of running
sequential programs concurrently, enabling the use of flow-control mechanisms. This
however requires a thread-local stack which is too resource heavy on small IoT devices.
Event-driven programming on the other hand does not require a thread-local stack but
programs are limited to computation as a callback on event triggers, meaning sequential
programs are very difficult to program. Protothreads combine these paradigms in a
lightweight way, keeping the yield semantics of threads and stacklessness of event-driven
programming. All protothreads in a system are run on the same stack, meaning each
protothread has a very low memory overhead, and by providing a conditional blocking wait
statement protothreads can execute cooperatively. A process is declared through a
\texttt{PROCESS} macro and can be automatically started after system boot or when a
specific module is loaded. 

\begin{figure}
    \caption{The state machine of Contiki threads. Adapted from \parencite{contiki-multithreading}.}
    \label{fig:state-machine}
    \begin{tikzpicture}[->,>=stealth',shorten >=1pt,auto,node distance=5cm, semithick]
        \node[initial,state] (A) {Ready};
        \node[state] (C) [below right of=A] {Exited};
        \node[state] (B) [above right of=C] {Running};
    
        \path (A) edge node {stop} (C)
                  edge[bend left=15] node {exec} (B)
              (B) edge[bend left=15] node {yield} (A)
                  edge node {stop} (C);
    \end{tikzpicture}
\end{figure}

Contiki-NGs execution model is event based, meaning processes often yield execution until
they are informed a certain event has taken place, upon which they can act.
Figure~\ref{fig:state-machine} shows the states of the processes and their transitions.
User-space processes are run in a cooperative manner while kernel-space processes can
preempt user-space processes. Examples of events are timers expiring, a process being
polled, or a network packet arriving.

\subsection{Memory Management}
\label{ssec:memory}
Memory can be allocated either statically, dynamically, or using a hybrid of static and
dynamic allocation. Static allocation happens at compile-time, and while deterministic it
limits the functionality of a program. Dynamic memory allocation allocates memory of
various sizes on a heap, which can lead to fragmentation of heap memory. This is a problem
in IoT devices as they are already resource constrained. The hybrid approach statically
allocates pools of memory which can then dynamically allocate memory segments inside the
pools. The hybrid approach does not suffer from external fragmentation as segments in the
pool are perfectly divided. However, that does not mean fragmentation cannot occur, as
sometimes segments will not be fully used and cause internal fragmentation.

Contiki-NG provides two memory allocators in addition to using static memory. They are
called \texttt{MEMB} and \texttt{HeapMem} and are semi-dynamic and dynamic, respectively.
\texttt{MEMB} allocates pools of static memory as arrays of constant sized objects. After
a memory pool has been declared, it is initialized after which objects can be allocated
memory from the pool. All objects allocated through the same pool have the same size.
Pools can be freed, and it is possible to check whether a pointer resides within a certain
memory pool or not.

\texttt{HeapMem} solves the issue of dynamically allocating objects of varying sizes
during runtime in Contiki-NG. It can be used on a variety of hardware platforms, something
a standard C \texttt{malloc} implementation could struggle with. To allocate memory on the
heap, the number of bytes to allocate must be provided and a pointer to a contiguous piece
of memory is returned (if there is enough contiguous memory). Memory can be reallocated
and deallocated such as using a normal \texttt{malloc}.

\subsection{Timers}
\label{ssec:timers}
Contiki-NG provides different timers used by both the kernel and user-space applications.
The timers are based on the clock module which is responsible for handling system time.
The definition of system time is platform dependent.

The different timers and their usages are:
\begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{timer} - A simple timer without built-in notification.
    \item \texttt{stimer} - Counts in seconds and has a long wrapping period.
    \item \texttt{etimer} - Schedules events to processes. Since events in Contiki-NG
            can put yielding processes in the execution state, \texttt{etimer} can be
            used to periodically schedule code by setting up an \texttt{etimer} to
            signal a specific event when it expires then waiting on that event.
    \item \texttt{ctimer} - Schedules calls to a callback function. \texttt{ctimer}
            works in similar ways to \texttt{etimer} but with callbacks to callback
            functions instead of events.
    \item \texttt{rtimer} - Schedules real-time tasks. Since real-time tasks face
            different requirements than normal tasks, rtimer uses a higher resolution
            clock. Real-time tasks preempt normal execution so that the real-time task can
            execute immediately. This mean there are constraints on what can be done in
            real-time tasks as many functions cannot handle preemption.
\end{itemize}

\texttt{timer}, \texttt{stimer}, and \texttt{rtimer} are stated to be safe from interrupts
while \texttt{etimer} and \texttt{ctimer} are unsafe. All timers are declared using a
timer struct, which is also how the timer is interacted with.

\subsection{Networking in Contiki-NG}
\label{ssec:networking-contiki}
Contiki-NG features an IPv6 network stack designed for unreliable, low-power IoT networks.
There are many protocols implemented in the stack, this thesis will look at UDP and CoAP
secured by DTLS. Beneath IPv6 Contiki-NG supports IEEE 802.15.4 with Time Slotted Channel
Hopping \parencite{ieee-802.15.4}.

The CoAP implementation in Contiki-NG is based on Erbium by Mattias Kovatsch but has
become part of core modules in the operating system itself \parencite{low-power-coap}. The
default implementation supports both unsecured (CoAP) and secured (CoAPs) communication.
CoAPs uses a DTLS implementation called TinyDTLS which handles encryption and decryption
of messages \parencite{tinydtls-github}. The CoAP implementation consists of
\parencite{contiki-coap}: 

\begin{itemize}
    \item A CoAP engine which registers CoAP resources.
    \item A CoAP handler API that allows for implementations of resource handlers. The
        handlers act upon incoming messages for their corresponding resource.
    \item A CoAP endpoint API allowing handling of different kinds of CoAP endpoints.
    \item A CoAP transport API which hands CoAP data from the CoAP stack to the transport
    protocol.
    \item CoAP message functions for parsing and creating messages.
    \item A CoAP timer API providing timers for retransmission mechanisms.    
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Firefly}
\label{ssec:firefly}
Zolertia Firefly is a supported hardware platform in Contiki-NG and the targeted board for
this thesis. It is a breakout board designed for IoT application development sporting an
ARM Cortex-M3 with 512 KB flash and 32 KB RAM, making it more powerful than the Class 1
devices the SUIT standard specifies as a lower bound. This is not an issue but should be
kept in mind as less capable devices are supposed to be able to use an update mechanism
that is complying with SUIT. Furthermore the board supports IEEE 802.15.4 communication in
the 2.4 GHz band and SHA2 and RSA hardware acceleration \parencite{firefly-datasheet}.

\end{document}